          CSIT5900 Lecture 1: Introduction


           Department of Computer Science and Engineering
           Hong Kong University of Science and Technology




(HKUST)                  Lecture 1: Introduction            1 / 12
What is AI?


According to John McCarthy, one of the founders of AI:


                           “It is the science and engineering of mak-
                           ing intelligent machines, especially intelli-
                           gent computer programs. It is related to
                           the similar task of using computers to un-
                           derstand human intelligence, but AI does
                           not have to confine itself to methods that
                           are biologically observable.”




        (HKUST)              Lecture 1: Introduction                       2 / 12
                            What is AI?
Are the following AI systems:
    A calculator?
    ChatGPT?
    An OS like iOS or Windows?
    An editor like Word or Emacs?




        (HKUST)                 Lecture 1: Introduction   3 / 12
Three Aspects of AI
 1   What motivate AI researchers? What are their long term goal?
       ▶ AI researchers want to make machines (esp. computer programs) that
         can do things (for humans) which so far can only be done by humans.
       ▶ In terms of computer science, AI is in the forefront of computer

         applications.
       ▶ AI’s long term goal is to build machines that can sense, think, and act

         intelligently.
 2   What are the techniques and algorithms that have come out of AI?
       ▶    Heuristic search algorithms, knowledge representation languages and
            reasoners, machine learning algorithms, etc.
 3   What are the impacts of AI?
       ▶ On other science and engineering: math, physics, chemistry, biology,
         etc
       ▶ On our everyday life
       ▶ On humanity in general




           (HKUST)                Lecture 1: Introduction                         4 / 12
Course Objectives




  1   Understand AI’s challenges and long term goals.
  2   Learn fundamental AI techniques and algorithms, not just the current
      popular ones.
  3   Appreciate AI problem solving methodology.




         (HKUST)               Lecture 1: Introduction                  5 / 12
Syllabus


    Designing simple agents (using machine learning, rule-based systems,
    machine evolution)
    Search (heuristic search, CSP, game tree search, MDP)
    Multiagent systems (game theory and auction)
    Knowledge representation and reasoning
    Uncertainty in AI
    Generative AI
Other course information - see canvas




        (HKUST)              Lecture 1: Introduction                  6 / 12
How It Got Started



                         Ada Lovelace (1815 - 1852), the only
                         child of the poet Lord Byron.




   Her note G describes an algorithm for Babbage’s Analytical Engine to
   compute Bernoulli numbers, and was considered to be the first
   published computer program.
   She wrote that “The Analytical Engine has no pretensions whatever
   to originate anything. It can do whatever we know how to order it to
   perform. It can follow analysis; but it has no power of anticipating
   any analytical relations or truths.”
      (HKUST)               Lecture 1: Introduction                  7 / 12
How It Got Started




                            Alan Turing (1912 - 1954), the father of
                            computer science.




Alan Turing. Computing machinery and intelligence. Mind, 59:433-460,
1950.
    “I propose to consider the question, ’Can machines think?’ This
    should begin with definitions of the meaning of the terms ’machine’
    and ’think.”’


        (HKUST)               Lecture 1: Introduction                     8 / 12
How It Got Started
The Dartmouth Conference (1956): proposed by John McCarthy, Marvin
Minsky, Nathaniel Rochester, and Claude Shannon:
    We propose that a 2 month, 10 man study of artificial intelligence
    be carried out during the summer of 1956 at Dartmouth College in
    Hanover, New Hampshire. The study is to proceed on the basis of
    the conjecture that every aspect of learning or any other feature
    of intelligence can in principle be so precisely described that a
    machine can be made to simulate it.
Here was for the first time the term “artificial intelligence” was used
(coined by McCarthy).

  More, McCarthy,                 Shannon, McCarthy,

  Minsky, Selfridge,              Ed     Fredkin    and

  Solomonoff                      Joseph Weizenbaum

  (2006)                          (1966)




             (HKUST)           Lecture 1: Introduction                    9 / 12
Some Influential AI Systems

   Marvel (1992) - a real-time expert system that monitors the massive
   stream of data from the Voyager spacecraft, handling routine tasks,
   and alerting the analysts to more serious problems at JPL.
   Pegasus (1994) - a speech understanding program that handles airline
   ticket reservations.
   An AI planning and scheduling system employed by US military
   during the Gulf War. (DARPA later reported that the savings resulted
   from using this single AI system had paid back the US Government all
   its investment on AI during the past 20 years.)
   Deep Blue (1997), AlphaGo (2016) and AlphaGo Zero (2017), IBM
   Watson (2011), BERT (2018), GPT-3 (2020), AlphaFold (2020),
   ChatGPT (2022), DeepSeak (2024), GPT5 (2025), pi-zero (2024),...


      (HKUST)               Lecture 1: Introduction                 10 / 12
New Problem Solving Methdology Using Generative AI

      AI is the science and engineering of making intelligent computer
      programs, the frontier of computer applications.
      AI gives you new ways to solve problems on computer: new
      methodologies, new algorithms, etc.
Write a python program that accepts a text file of either Chinese or
English and outputs the following:
  1   The total number of words (Chinese characters) in the file
  2   The line numbers of the shortest and longest lines, respectively, in the
      file
  3   The number of lines that contain all of the words in one of the
      shortest lines.
How do you think you would solve the problem two years ago? How about
now? Would GPT4 or CoPilot help?

         (HKUST)                Lecture 1: Introduction                    11 / 12
Open Discussion

   How smart is today’s AI? How do you make it smarter?
   AI Dream? ”AI inspires dreams of computerized personal assistants
   intertwined in every facet of our lives. The new technology will handle
   our transportation, help teach our children, provide routine medical
   care, create entertainment, and manage daily household errands and
   chores.” ©2025 Bloomberg L.P.
   AI means the end of the humanity?
   AI 2027 https://ai-2027.com
   The ’godfather of AI’ (Hinton) reveals the only way humanity can
   survive superintelligent AI https:
   //edition.cnn.com/2025/08/13/tech/ai-geoffrey-hinton



      (HKUST)                Lecture 1: Introduction                   12 / 12
